Add a deprecation warning to > in Class (#15802)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/addendum/type-classes.rst

themselves. They often arise when using classes for logical
properties, e.g.:

.. deprecated:: 8.16

   In future versions, in addition to the instance, this should also

>    declare a :ref:`coercion<coercions>`, like for any other record.

Reviewer: I don't see how this relates to the material above or below it.  Can you explain or find a better place.  What does "this" refer to?

Author: You are right, this deserves a pointer, I added a :ref: to the appropriate paragraphs in the refman.

(see the :ref:`singleton class <singleton-class>` variant for an
explanation). These may be used as parts of other classes:

.. coqtop:: none

   Set Warnings "-future-coercion-class-field".

.. coqtop:: all

   Class PreOrder (A : Type) (R : relation A) :=
     { PreOrder_Reflexive :> Reflexive A R ;
       PreOrder_Transitive :> Transitive A R }.

.. coqtop:: none

>    Set Warnings "+future-coercion-class-field".

Reviewer: FYI: you can also use `.. coqtop:: reset` here.  Of course, you lose any definitions/settings/theorems above that point.

The syntax ``:>`` indicates that each ``PreOrder`` can be seen as a
``Reflexive`` relation. So each time a reflexive relation is needed, a
preorder can be used instead. This is very similar to the coercion
mechanism of ``Structure`` declarations. The implementation simply
declares each projection as an instance.

.. warn:: A coercion will be introduced in future versions when using ':>' in 'Class' declarations. Use '#[global] Existing Instance field.' instead if you don't want the coercion.

   .. deprecated:: 8.16

   In future versions, in addition to the instance, :g:`:>` should also
   declare a :ref:`coercion<coercions>`, like
   :ref:`for any other record field<coercions-classes-as-records>`.
   Use :cmd:`Existing Instance` or :cmd:`Coercion` separately rather
   than :g:`:>` if you don't want both in the future (this will also
   avoid this warning).

.. warn:: Ignored instance declaration for “@ident”: “@term” is not a class

   Using this ``:>`` syntax with a right-hand-side that is not itself a Class

>    has no effect (apart from emitting this warning).

Reviewer: If you're willing to change this:
The description of :> just above here should be under the Record command, which is where the `:>` syntax is introduced.  Probably should be like this just above the ```In :n:`@field_spec`:``` line.  Indentation matters.

```
   :n:`:>` in :n:`@of_type`
     Explanation...
```

The warning should appear with the other messages under Record.

Author: > The description of :> just above here should be under the Record command, [...]

Good point, done.

> The warning should appear with the other messages under Record.

I'm reluctant to do that, this warning is very specific to the Class command, if put under a command, it should rather be the Class than the Record command.

Reviewer: Yeah, Class command makes more sense.  Don't take my suggestions blindly :-).

(see the :ref:`singleton class <singleton-class>` variant for an
explanation). These may be used as parts of other classes:

.. coqtop:: none

   Set Warnings "future-coercion-class-field".

.. coqtop:: all

>    Class PreOrder (A : Type) (R : relation A) :=

Reviewer: This doesn't render well.  Can you tweak how the message is generated so there's a line break?  Also, IIRC I haven't seen the `^^^^^^^^^^^^` for other warnings, is there a way to avoid that?  After addressing that, can you change the example so it doesn't get the warning message?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/158869751-52b45d97-01d7-48e7-bf40-383213f9e31f.png)

Author: Let's just silence the warning in the example (like done elsewhere in the refman). The warning is not the goal of this example anyway.

.. warn:: Ignored instance declaration for “@ident”: “@term” is not a class

   Using this ``:>`` syntax with a right-hand-side that is not itself a Class
   has no effect (apart from emitting this warning).

> .. warn:: 'Class >' currently does nothing, a coercion will be introduced in future versions.
> 
>    :g:`Class >` will behave as :g:`Record >` in future versions,
>    declaring the construcotr a coercion.
> 
> .. warn:: 'Class >' currently does nothing, a coercion will be introduced in future versions.
> 
>    :g:`Record >` make the constructor a coercion, but there is no
>    constructor for singleton classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. warn:: 'Class >' currently does nothing, a coercion will be introduced in future versions.

   :g:`Class >` will behave as :g:`Record >` in future versions,
   declaring the constructor a coercion.

.. warn:: 'Class >' currently does nothing, a coercion will be introduced in future versions.

   :g:`Record >` make the constructor a coercion, but there is no
   constructor for singleton classes.
```
Messages are identical, combine.  Bigger question: what should the user do to make these warnings go away?  If there's no way for the user to fix this, what's the benefit of these warnings?  I would avoid the "in the future" wording.

Author: Thanks, that's a mistake (bad copy/paste), fixed. I added a sentence on how to avoid the warning.

.. warn:: Ignored instance declaration for “@ident”: “@term” is not a class

   Using this ``:>`` syntax with a right-hand-side that is not itself a Class
   has no effect (apart from emitting this warning).

.. warn:: 'Class >' currently does nothing, a coercion will be introduced in future versions.

>    :g:`Class >` will behave as :g:`Record >` in future versions,
>    declaring the construcotr a coercion. Remove the :g:`>` to avoid
>    this warning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   While currently ignored, in a future version, :g:`Class >` will declare the constructor
   a coercion (consistent with :g:`Record >`). Remove the :g:`>` to avoid
   this warning.
```

This should appear in the description of the `Class` command, not here.  It's syntax related.

What are bad consequences of having a current `Class >` suddenly have a coercion in some future release?  How is this message really beneficial for users?

Author: > This should appear in the description of the Class command, not here. It's syntax related.

Good point, I updated the syntax of the command.

> What are bad consequences of having a current Class > suddenly have a coercion in some future release? How is this message really beneficial for users?

It's rather the other way around. Currently, this syntax is accepted but silently does nothing. So, if we make it effective in a future version, a user that would expect backward compatibility may get unpleasant errors, so better make this (very likely unused currently) syntax a hard error in at least one version before actually activating it.

.. warn:: 'Class >' is not supported for singleton typeclasses.

   :g:`Record >` make the constructor a coercion, but there is no
   constructor for singleton classes. Remove the :g:`>` to avoid this

>    warning.

Reviewer: Is it possible to combining this message and the previous message into one?  They're both about `Class >` and coercions, but the distinction doesn't seem interesting.  Unless, perhaps, the idea is that this one will not change in the future.

Author: Indeed, this will not change (singleton classes have no constructor to turn into a coercion, so the syntax simply doesn't make any sense).

.. warn:: A coercion will be introduced in future versions when using ':>' in 'Class' declarations. Use '#[global] Existing Instance field.' instead if you don't want the coercion.

   Currently, :g:`:>` only declares an instance. It will also declare
   a coercion in future versions, like for any other record. Use
   :cmd:`Existing Instance` or :cmd:`Coercion` separately rather than
   :g:`:>` if you don't want both in the future (this will also avoid

>    this warning).

Reviewer: Should be under the `Class` command description.  If the user wants both in the future, they have to change their now to make the warning go away?  That doesn't seem too friendly.

Author: Indeed, it's a bug (#2643 #9014), we are trying to sort it out in the less unfriendly way for most users. Feel free to express any suggestion that would improve that. Here is the status of the thing:
* this `:>` syntax in `Class` is used by about one third of the projects tested in the CI
* turning coercions on breaks four of them (c.f. the overlays above), mostly (for 3 out of the 4) because they actually need the coercion and declare it by hand which leads to an error "field is already a coercion" if we turn them on for the `:>`. For them, removing the `:>` as advised will be the only backward compatible fix.
* there seems to be a tiny portion of users (so, only 1 out of the more than 50 projects tested in the CI) for whom turning on coercions on `:>` in `Class` is harmful, that's the purpose of the warning so that they get a chance to hear about the change before it actually happens.

-----------------------

.. cmd:: Class @record_definition

>          Class @ident_decl {* @binder } {? : @sort } := @constructor

Reviewer: I would not change this line at all because you later explain that it currently does nothing.  Your change would create a puzzle: "where is the `>`?"

Author: The one "currently doing nothing" is the one in `record_definition`, this one for singleton class is doing nothing and will keep doing so (it really has no meaning).

   declared rigid during resolution so that the class abstraction is
   maintained.

>    The `>` in
>    :token:`record_definition` currently does nothing. In a future version, it will
>    create coercions as it does when used in :cmd:`Record` commands.
> 

Reviewer 2: Do we want to mention why it does nothing? I mean it was previously documented to do something but the reader might not know that.

Perhaps something like:
```suggestion
   The `>` in :token:`record_definition` currently does nothing, even
   though it was documented in previous versions. In a future version, it will create
   coercions as it does when used in :cmd:`Record` commands.
```

Author: Not sure I get your point here, nor even what "it was documented in previous versions" mean?
Do you mean that we should insist on the fact that the thing was improperly documented before?

Reviewer 2: Right, I just thought it might be confusing for readers to see mention of a no longer existing `>` but I could also be over thinking it. Perhaps it is fine as it is.

Author: Well, it reads "currently does nothing", that does not imply anything about the past.
So I think it should be fine (particularly considering this is transitory and will change in some further release).
But thanks for raising the concern anyway.

   declared rigid during resolution so that the class abstraction is
   maintained.

   The `>` in
   :token:`record_definition` currently does nothing. In a future version, it will

>    create coercions as it does when used in other :cmd:`Record` commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   create coercions as it does when used in :cmd:`Record` commands.
```

   declared rigid during resolution so that the class abstraction is
   maintained.

>    Contrary to other :cmd:`Record`, the `>` in

Author: I completely removed this, it's redundant with the next sentence.

         This command has no effect when used on a typeclass.

.. _warn-future-coercion-class-field:

   .. warn:: A coercion will be introduced in future versions when using ':>' in 'Class' declarations. Use '#[global] Existing Instance field.' instead if you don't want the coercion.

>       .. deprecated:: 8.16

Reviewer 3: It's not the warning that is deprecated. You should remove either the `.. warn::` or the `.. deprecated::` in the documentation (keep only one of them). Since it's a bit weird anyway to use the "deprecated" category for something that is going to be added, I'd say just keeping the `.. warn::` seems the best option.
